-- this is a notes sheet for my sql endeavors from the course CS107 Database fundamentals from study.com
-- this is a comment
-- show everything from table students
SELECT * FROM Students;

-- show specific columns
SELECT FirstName, Age FROM Students;

-- show unique values only (no dupes)
SELECT DISTINCT City FROM Students;

-- Show top 5
SELECT * FROM Students LIMIT 5;

-- multiple conditions
SELECT * FROM Studnets WHERE Age > 20 AND City = 'NYC';

-- in a list
SELECT * FROM Students WHERE City IN ('NYC', 'LA', 'CHI');

-- range
SELECT * FROM Students WHERE Age BETWEEN 18 AND 25;

-- Pattern match
SELECT * FROM Students WHERE FirstName LIKE 'A%';
	
-- missing data
SELECT * FROM Students WHERE Phone IS NULL;

-- A to Z sort
SELECT * FROM Students ORDER BY LastName ASC;

-- Sort by multiple columns
SELECT * FROM Students ORDER BY City ASC, Age DESC;


-- different example of what the syntax of a left join is
-- SELECT from students the name, and from cars the model. From Students table, do a left-join of cars onto students id where the cars match the students id. This then shows us what student (name) has what type of car

-- ### JOINS AND WHAT NOT ### --
Example tables:
Students:
ID   Name
1    Alex
2    Sam
3    Jordan 

Enrollments
StudentId    Class
1            Math
1            Science
2            History

-- inner join
SELECT Students.Name, Enrollments.Class 
FROM Students
INNER JOIN Enrollments ON Students.ID = Enrollments.StudentID;

Result
Name    Class
Alex    Math
Alex    Science
Sam     History


-- Left Join example shows everything shows every name

SELECT Students.Name, Enrollments.Class
FROM Students
LEFT JOIN Enrollments ON Students.ID = Enrollments.StudentId;

Result 

Name    class
Alex    Science
Sam     History
Jordan  Null


-- right Join example
-- shows everything from enrollments.class's
SELECT Students.Name, Enrollments.Class
FROM Students
RIGHT JOIN Enrollments ON Students.ID Enrollments.StudentID;

Result
Name   class
Alex   Math
Alex   Science
Sam    History
NULL   geography


-- insert stuff
INSERT INTO tblAlbum(artistName, albumTitle, genre)
VALUES ('Journey','Raised on Radio', 'Rock');

-> result
artistName albumTitle       genre
Journey    Raised on Radio  Rock

-- it is permissible to add values without filling every field
INSERT INTO tblAlbum(artistName, albumTitle)
VALUES ('Eikona', 'Hymns')


-- backup insertion (triggered whenever a user enters a new record into db)
INSERT INTO tblBackup(artist, albumTitle, genre)
SELECT artist, albumTitle, genre
FROM csuromer
WHERE tblBakcup.CustomerID = customer.customerID;

-- drop column deletes the entire columns and field
ALTER TABLE students DROP COLUMN studentID;

-- a database lock is a mech used to control access to shared data items.
There are 2 main categories, read and write locks. Read locks are shareable, 
while write locks are not. Meaning that no other user can get a read lock while a 
write lock is active. 

-- there are 4 different levels of transaction isolation.
-- 1. READ UNCOMMITTED
	you can read the data in another transaction that is happening right now
	even if it hasn't been saved (committed) yet. This is problematic because
	the other transaction changed its mind and reverts, and you already
	made a decision based on data that never really existed. Super fast, very problematic
-- 2. READ COMMITTED 
	You read committed/saved data. At this level, a Non-repeatable read can happen where 
	you read the row, and later in the same transaction it changed because someone committed
	something new to it, like an update (not an insert). You get 2 different answers for the same read
-- 3. REPEATABLE READ
	Gurantees that when you read a specific row, that row will look exactly the same for
	the rest of the transaction no matter who changes it. At this level, Phantom reads can happen where
	you run a query to read rows, and you get 10, then later in the same transaction
	you get 15. Rows have been commited while you were in the same transaction. Thats where those
	phantoms come from. 
-- 4. SERIALIZIABLE 
	this level is most secure but is still prone to "paradoxal math". Formally spoken: A Serialization
	Anomaly means the databse ended up in a state the logically does not make sense. for example
		You are trying to sell product A and B, but you can only buy product B if A is in stock. (matching set)
		Transaction 1, buys the last product A and stock goes to 0. Transaction 2 buys prod B (error)
		But if transaction 2 starts first, it sees that prod A is in stock and so it can buy prod B too.
		But before it finishes, transaction 1 starts and finishes. The stock is now 0 for stock A. 
		Therefore it is paradoxical.    

-- Two Phased Locking (2pl)
	Is a locking mech that gurantees serializability in transaction. A transaction is serializable if the
	execution schedule of the transaction is not interrupted by another schedule from a different
	transaction. 

-- Deadlock situation
	A Deadlock situation is when t1 (transaction 1) has something that t2 wants, and wants what t2 has
	but because t1 has a lock on A, it cant close out A until the entire T is complete which it requires
	B for, which t2 is holding. The converse is true. Therefore T1 and T2 cannot finish their transaction. 
	2pl DOES NOT ensure the problem of deadlocks is removed.

-- Conservative Two Phased Locking (c2pl)
	This scheme is aimed to prevent deadlock situations, by first aquiring all of the locks before
	starting the transaction.

--# for more professional environments, each transaction will have many querries and must all be executed
	for integrity of the database Each of these transaction must display ACID
-- A : Atomicity
	Atomicity requires that all operations related to that transaction are all succesfully completed or aborted.
-- C : Consistency
	The data entered by the transaction must be consistent with the rest of the data, and if integrity
	is violated, the entire transaction is aborted. 
-- I : Isolation 
	Isolation refers to a particular transaction and its related tasks are executed without interruption.
	Once a T starts, it cannot be used by another T until the first once finishes. 
-- D : Durability
	Durability ensures that once a transaction has been completed, a system failure cannot cause that T to 
	be reversed or lost. 

-- Relational databases vs non-relational
	Sql, Mysql, sqlite vs nosql 
	Relational databases are strict and organized. It is good when you need to ask complex questions
	such as " Show me all mechanics who are available on tuesday, have been working for longer than
	half a year, and are okay with working overtime." 
	NoSql is like throwing a box of data into a cupboard and closing it quick. It is insanely fast
	but hard to ask those complex questions. It is good for self contained info, such as just 
	storing customer info and needing to get read. 

-- Relational databases vs Hiearchal
	A Hierarchical database is a set of tables organized in a parent-child relation. E.g.:
		Pavement improvement > (Reconstruction, Maintenance > ( Routine, corrective, preventive), Rehab)
	A HDB stores info based on its relationship to the information around it, like a tree. This makes
	searching very fast but insertion not as fast. The opposite is true for Relational Databases. 


-- Normalization
	1NF's requirements is that every field must contain a single value for each field. Arrays are
	not allowed for a field, or multiple entries for fields like phone numbers. It also must not have
	duplicate fields such as phone1 phone2 phone3.

	2NF's requirements is that every field that is a non-key value must depend on the whole candidate key
	not just a part of it. (Wiki has a great explanation of this). But basically, every field that is not
	part of the composite key must rely on both. Grade relies on both StudentID and CourseID, Coursename
	does not.
 
	3NF's requirements is that every key must depend on the primary key ONLY. Ensure that there is no
	transitive properties at play. If B relies on A, and C relies on B, then you are not in 3NF. For 
	example, SupplierID is directly linked to ItemID, but NxtDelivery is dependent on supplierID. This
	is that transitive hogus bogus.

	Normalization is important, it leads to a clean and well maintained database. For example, not having
	duplicates ensures that there would not be update anomalies. If there are multiple identical fields,
	then updating one would not ensure that the other is updated. Then you have instances of the same
	variable which are now different values. At first, this may be complicated to wrap your head around, 
	but practising with DeepSeek normalized and not normalized, or whatever AI would help. I (roughly)
	got it down within 3 hours. 

The LIKE operator is a very useful tool when searching records for a pattern
	instead of an exact value. If we want to search records with a FirstName
	that starts with the letter 'E', we can use the LIKE operator in the
	SELECT statement.
		SELECT * FROM Actors WHERE FirstName LIKE 'E%';
	If we want to search for a pattern that has more letters:
		SELECT * FROM Actors WHERE LastName LIKE '%an%';

If we want to search for multiple values in our WHERE clause, we can use the
	IN operator in the SELECT statement as follows:
		SELECT * FROM Actors WHERE LastName in('Rudd','Robbie');

If we want to search for values within a range, we can use the BETWEEN op
	SELECT * FROM Actors WHERE Age BETWEEEN '25' and '39';
this will return all actors ages including 25 through 39 including 39

Dealing with null values is something that you have to look out for, and 
	we can adjust for null values by using ISNULL which replaces a null value
	with a different value.
		ISNULL(expression, alternate_value)
	The expression represent the value / field we are looking at, and the
	alternate value is the value we will use if value / field is NULL.
Examples:
	ISNULL comes in handy in math to avoid dividing by 0 or logisitical 
	errors. Below is an example where we calculate the cost of items
	in the inventory. If we dont ahve the item on  hand, the value is null.
	To make the query run correctly we will replace that null with a zero.
		SELECT itemName, cost * ISNULL(qty,0) FROM tblinventory;
	Or another example is if we want to add up amounts for paycodes for 
	payrolls, and some pay codes may never have been used in a quarter.
		SELECT q1.payCode, q2.payCode
		ISNULL(q1.wageAmount, 0) + ISNULL(q2.wageAmount, 0)
		FROM tblQuarterlyWage;
	Final example is getting an average of ratings on music albums. If
	a rating is null, we will replace it with 50 to not skew it any way.
		SELECT AVG(ISNULL(rating,50)) FROM tblAlbum;
NVL is also used, and works similarly but only on the Oracle databases.
	NVL(nullValue, desiredValue);
It works on everything except objects
	SELECT NVL(TO_CHAR(Rating), 'Unrated') FROM tblAlbum;

To execute specific instruction upon a specific condition, we can use CASE
Using case in actual sql is better since you wont have to pre-emptively run
through all of the results in order to achieve your desired outcome. 

	SELECT artistID, genreID,
		CASE genreID
			WHEN 1 THEN 'Rock'
			WHEN 2 THEN 'Classical'
			ELSE 'Some other genre'
		END AS "Genre Classification"
	FROM tblArtist;
To explain the code from above, if the genreID is 1, 'Rock' will be
	displayed, if 2 then 'Classical', else the other one.

CRUD commands dont take effect immediately, and enter the data in a 
	temporary state. You would need to commit them to take effect.
INSERT INTO Lessons VALUES('LS004', 'Service Engineering');
COMMIT;

SAVEPOINT command is used to temporarily save a transaction that you 
	can roll back whenever necessary
INSERT INTO Lessons VALUES('LS004','Reliability Engineering');
SAVEPOINT A;

you could then do another transaction and 
SAVEPOINT B;

The ROLLBACK command restores the database to the last commited state
and can be used with the SAVEPOINT command to jump to that savepoint.

	ROLLBACK TO A;

TRUNCATE vs DROP
Truncate is used to delete all rows from a table. It is efficient because
	it performs a drop and a re-add of the table which is faster than 
	removing data row-by-row.
The DELETE statment will only delete rows base don  agiven condition in an
	SQL WHERE clause, but it doesnt free up any of that space. This leads
	to bloat and potentially huge files. Another important feature is that
	it will reset auto-numbered / sequential value fields. If ID is set up
	for AUTO-INCREMENT, all the truncated will reset the next value. 

When Databases get really big, it could be hard to access specific info,
	in such scenarios, creating an SQL View is handy. A View allows you
	to see certain data points while hidinng others by creating a virtual
	table. This also comes in handy when you want some information to be
	easily accessible while hiding others.
For Example:
	Table tblCustomer has DOB, address, phone number, email, and credit card
	information. You could create a View that only shows the customers
	whos DOB is within the current month but hide their actual DOB and 
	everything else. 
Syntax:
	CREATE VIEW view_name AS 
	SELECT customerName, customerEmail 
	FROM tblCustomer
	WHERE condition;
Solid Example:
	CREATE VIEW Employee_View AS
	SELECT empID, empFullName, empJobTitle
	FROM tblEmployee
	WHERE empID > 0;

The syntax for dropping a view is 
	DROP VIEW Employee_View;
Alternatively, to be more safe you could use IF EXISTS to make sure
	you arent trying to drop a view that isnt in the DB
		DROP VIEW IF EXISTS
			Employee_View;

Database Index Types:

A B+ tree database index is a balanced tree with many branches, when 
	you complete a search the entire DB index is scanned. This is great
	for complex searches.
B- tree is great for simple queries since it is self balancing with only
	a few branches. 
R- tree database index is used for spatial, or location and data. An ex
	is using a GPS.

Categories of database indexes:

A clustered index are indexes where the order of rows is the same as
	the order within the indexed rows. The records are physically
	established within the db table. You can only have one clustered
	index per table, but you could also have more non-clustered indexes.
	This is an actual sorted index.
A non-clustered index does not indicate how the records are arranged
	or ordered within the table. These indexes are in a different table
	and you can have many non-clustered indexes created for one table.
	A way to look a non-clustered index,"row 5 is over there" instead
	of actually sorting it. 

Index Syntax
	CREATE INDEX nameOfIndex
	ON tableName (nameOfColumn)

a unique index ensures that duplicate values arent entered. Use UNIQUE
	to specify that the index is unique.
	CREATE UNIQUE INDEX name_of_index
	ON name_of_table (column1, column2, ...);

